
Course Allocation and Scheduling System


by 
Awais ali

Supervised by 
Dr. Ayaz Hussain 



Department of Computer Science 
Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad



AKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all those who supported me during the completion of this project.
I am especially thankful to my supervisor, Dr. Ayaz Hussain, for their valuable guidance, encouragement, and constructive feedback throughout this work. Their support was instrumental in helping me stay focused and improve the quality of the project.
I would also like to thank the faculty of the Department of Computer Science, for providing a strong academic foundation and the resources needed to complete this work.
Special thanks to my friends and classmates for their cooperation and helpful suggestions, and to my family for their constant support and motivation.
This project would not have been possible without the contribution of all these individuals. I am truly grateful.
















ABSTRACT
The Course Scheduling and Allocation System aims to automate and optimize the course allocation process to students and schedule best classes. In traditional schools, course allocation and timetabling are mostly done manually, are time-consuming, and prone to conflict such as overlapping of classes or in adequacy of space.
This system will assist in resolving these problems by offering a centralized forum through which students are enrolled into courses based on their study program, semester, and prerequisites. The system considers aspects such as availability of courses, instructor schedules, classroom capacity, and student preferences while assigning courses. The system automatically creates students' and faculty members' conflict-free schedules.
The answer is built upon modern web technologies and includes a database to manage course information, users, and schedules. The accuracy is enhanced, administrative workload reduced, and the experience of students and teaching staff improved. The system is particularly beneficial in universities and colleges where it is not viable to manage large quantities of course and scheduling information manually.








































Chapter 1
Software Project Management Plan











1.1 Introduction
The management of course allocation and schedule in educational institutions is a complex task, often leading to the conflict between classrooms, disabled resource use and student dissatisfaction. An automated course allocation and schedueling system solve these challenges and hand over the courses for time slots and rooms while avoiding conflicts. Using the adaptation algorithm, the system faculty ensures proper and efficient scheduling based on availability, student preferences and ability of the room. The project aims to develop a reliable solution that reduces manual effort, eliminates timetable skirmishes, and enhances educational experience for both students and administrators.
1.2 Problem Definition
Educational institutions manually face important challenges in management courses and the program, causing disability and disappointment for both students and administrators. The current system often consists of timetable clashes, where overlapping class schedule prevents students from enrolment in necessary or preferred courses. Additionally, classes are reduced less than poor resource allocation or overbooks, while faculty lacks availability becomes more complicated. These disabilities create administrative burden, as manual adjustments are time -taken and often fail to solve all conflicts. Students, in turn, experience dissatisfaction when they are forced to compromise their educational plans due to scheduling conflicts. To address these issues, an automated course allocation and scheduling system are required. Such a system will wisely provide courses, adapt to resource usage, and end scheduling conflicts, ensuring a comfortable and fair educational experience for all stakeholders. By taking advantage of algorithm solutions, this system will reduce manual efforts, improve efficiency, and increase overall satisfaction in course registration and scheduling processes.
1.3 Motivation
The current manual process of scheduling courses in universities often result in timetable conflict, disabled resource allocation and frustration for both students and faculty. Students struggle when the required courses overlap, which is forced to delay their educational progress, while administrators ruin the valuable time trying to manually resolve the scheduling issues. These challenges become more complicated as institutions expand the offerings of their course and increase student enrolment. An automated course allocation and scheduling system can solve these problems by intelligently assigning the classes for optimal time slots and rooms. By eliminating conflicts and optimizing resource usage, such a system will reduce administrative charge, ensure proper access to courses, and creates a smooth educational experience for all. The purpose of this project is to modernize the scheduling process, which is more efficient, transparent and student friendly.
1.6 Project Organization
1 Model
The project will follow Agile development methodology, which implements features through a repeated sprint. Development will prioritize the first core scheduling functionality, then will include additional facilities such as successive conflict solutions and adaptation. A product will guide the implementation process while maintaining flexibility to adapt the requirements to develop backlog. Regular progress assessment will ensure continuous improvement in the entire development life cycle.
2 Roles and Responsibilities
Role 
My role is to develop a course allocation and scheduling system which will automatically solve the clashes generated a perfect timetable. I have to use algorithm in backend to solve the clashes. 
Responsibilities:
Requirement Analysis: I must understand the user requirement for the start of the project.
Design: Creating the architecture, database schema, and UI/UX flow.
Development: Developing the project and implementing its feature.
Testing: Testing the features of the system and conducting the acceptance test.
Deployment: Deploying the system.
Maintenance: Fixing bugs and improving features post-launch.
3 Tools and Techniques


1.6.4 Project deliverables
Software Project Management Plan (SPMP).
Software Requirement Specification (SRS).
Software Design Description (SDD).
Software Test Documentation (STD).
The web application. 

1.7 Project Management plan
This project management plan allocates the resources and schedules the activities. It also identifies the task that should be done.
1 Task 


2 Timetable













Chapter 2
Software Requirements Specifications













1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose
This system automated the course allocation and scheduling for students, faculty and administrators. This automatically eliminates the course conflict, allowing students to register for courses. The faculty can specify your favourite courses to teach, and the algorithm of the system will assign them based on room availability and scheduling obstacles. Wise allocation ensures optimal resource usage for all users while maintaining a struggle-free timetable.
1.2 Scope
This system automatic the course scheduling to avoid timetable clashes. It provides classes for available rooms and allows students to register without conflict. Teachers can choose preferred courses, and the system assigns them properly. Educational schedules and reports can be seen but cannot struggle manually. The system only handles the course scheduling.
1.3 Functionality               
It will allow the student to register their courses.
Student can view their courses using it.
Student can also the drop courses.
It will allow the user to view the schedule of courses.
Administration can generate the schedule of the courses.
Administration also can modify the schedule.
Administration can delete the schedule.
1.4 Stakeholder 
Student
Teacher
Admin
1.5 Constraints
Must fallow the university policies so there will be no workload to the faculty.
There can be some unresolved able conflict of courses.
Must support web-based access.
The devices should be connected to the network.

2 External Interface Requirements
2.1 User Interface
The system will provide a web-based interface accessible through the browser.
Specific dashboard for student to register courses, for teacher to view timetable and for administration to generate timetable.
Easy to use web-based application for each stakeholder.
2.2 Hardware Interface 
Must run on the existing system operating system of university. 
Support the standard pc and laptops.
2.3 software Interface 
Support window Windows 10+ and mac.
It should be integrated with database.
2.4 Communication protocols
3 Functional Requirements
3.1 Usecase List 
Sign in 
Sign up
Register course
View course
Drop course 
Allocate course 
Deallocate course
Generate timetable 
View timetable 
Update timetable 
Delete timetable
Add class 
Remove class 
Log out 
3.2 Usecase Diagram 



 


 








                                                                                                                                    



3.3 Usecase Description 
1. Sign up 
The system will provide the functionality of Sign up and create a new account.






2. Sign in 
The system Will provide the functionality of sign in to the register account.


3. Register courses
The system will allow the student to register the courses.

4. View courses
The student able to view the registered courses.

5. Drop course
The student will be allowed to drop any courses using system 

6. Allocate courses
The system will have functionality of allocate the courses to the teacher.

7. Deallocate course
The system will have functionality of deallocate the course to the teacher.

8. Generate timetable
The system will have functionality of allocate the courses to the teacher.

9. View timetable
The system will have functionality of displaying schedule for courses.

10. Delete timetable
The system will have functionality of deleting timetable.

11. Update timetable
The system will have functionality of Updating the timetable details.

12. Add class
The system will allow the administration to add a class in class list.

13. Remove class
The system will allow the administration to remove a class from class list.

14. Log out
The system will allow the user to log out from the account.

3.4 System Sequence Diagram
It is used to show interaction between the system and user. How the functionality will work.
Sign in 

Sign up







Register course



View course


Drop course 



Allocate course 



Deallocate course




Generate timetable 



View timetable 



Update timetable 



Delete timetable

Add class 



Remove class 


Log out 



4 Domain Model





5 Software System Attributes
5.1 Reliability 
The system will reliably manage the course allocation and scheduling. The validation will ensure that the system behaviour remains correct under normal and exceptional circumstances. 
5.2 Availability
The system will be accessible to all user during the academic period. Web based applications make ensure that everyone can access the application, when they are connected to the internet.
5.3 Security
The system will ensure that authentication using login information and enforce the access control for student, faculty and administration. Sensitive operation, like timetable generation, allocation of courses will be accessible to authorized users. 
5.4 Maintainability 
The system will be constructed using MVC architecture and modular approach, well-documented code. Future updates can be made with little interruption, such as adding support for new features or repairing bugs. Error tracking tools and log files will help identify and fix problems.
5.5 Portability 
Being a web-based solution means it will work with the main operating systems (Windows, macOS, Linux) and accessed through a modern web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Edge - to name a few). Backend components can be deployed on any server that supports Node.js and MongoDB.
5.6 Performance
System will be architected to manage multiple users concurrently (e.g., for instance, registration peaks). Database indexing, query optimization, and pagination will provide for rapid response times for operations such as course lookup, registration, and timetable generation.

6. Database requirement 
The system will use MongoDB database to store, retrieve and manage all data. The database must fulfil the following requirement:

6.1 Database name  
CourseSchedulingDB
6.2 Collections 

6.3 Key field 
Use of indexes on key fields:
registrationNo, email in users
courseId, studentId in registrations
teacherId in allocations
 Support for query filters, pagination, and sort operations on listings






























Chapter 3
Software Design Description 

























1. Introduction
1.1 Design Overview
The system is intended to automate course registration, allocation, and timetabling. It partitions the interface, logic, and data layers according to the MVC (Model-View-Controller) pattern. The main features are student registration, teacher-course assignment, class creation, and automatic generation of timetables based on backend algorithms that avoid conflicts.

1.2 Requirements Traceability Matrix
2. System Architecture Design 
2.1 system Architecture
The system is using Model View Controller (MVC) Architecture:
Model: The system uses MongoDB Model to store the class, Allocation, registration of courses and user information.
View: The view is interfaces for user, admin and Teacher.
Controller: The controller handles the validation of data, user request and system logic.

2.2 Alternative Designs
Monolithic Architecture: A traditional approach where an entire application is built as a single, integrated unit. It's like a single, large piece of code that performs all the necessary functions. 
It is not suitable due to future scalability concerns.
Microservices Architecture: Microservices architecture is a method of designing software applications as a collection of small, independent, and loosely coupled services. Each service is responsible for a specific business function.
It is not suitable due to high complexity.
2.3 System Interface Discerption
Frontend: The frontend design using CSS, HTML and JavaScript.
Backend: The Node JS and Express JS is used for backend.
Database: MongoDB will be used for storing data. 
3. Detail Discerption of component 
3.1 Authentication Module
It will manage the user registration sing in, sign up and session control for log out. It allows users to access according to their role. If the user is a student, then there will be specific option that will be available to the student, and it will allow the user to access feature according to their role (student, Teacher and admin).
3.2 Course Registration Module 
This Module have functionality of register course and drop course.  It will help in preventing the conflicts between courses of timetable. It will help in generating the timetable. The students can register and drop a course.
3.3 Course Allocation Module
It will mange allocation and deallocation of courses to the teachers. It will allow the admin to allocate the course to the teacher if that teacher is interested and available. 
3.4 Timetable Generation Module
It will generate schedule automatically based on register courses by students, availability of classrooms and allocation of courses for the teachers. It will allow the admin update and delete schedule. 
3.5 Class Management Module
Supports the Add Class and Remove Class functionalities. Admins can add new classrooms and remove existing ones from the system. Interacts with the timetable module to ensure only available classes are used in scheduling.
4. User Interface Design 
4.1 Description of the User Interface
Student Dashboard: It will allow student to register course, drop course and view timetable.  
Teacher Dashboard: It will allow teacher to view timetable.
Admin Dashboard: It will allow admin to allocate/deallocate course to teacher, Add/Remove class and update/Delete/ generate and view schedule.




4.2 Screen Image 
These screens are just prototype there can be change while creating a web application.
1. Sign in/Sign up







2. Student 















3. Teacher

4. Admin






4.3 Object and action 






5. Sequence Diagram 
5.1 Sign in 

5.2 Sign up

5.3 Register course

5.4 View course


5.5 Drop course 


5.6 Allocate course 


5.7 Deallocate course



5.8 Generate timetable 



5.9 View timetable 


5.10 Update timetable 


5.11 Delete timetable


5.12 Add class 



5.13 Remove class 


5.14 Log out 

6. Class Diagram














7. Swimlane diagram













Chapter 3
Software Test Documentation















1. Introduction
1.1 System Overview
The course allocation and scheduling system is Web based application. It is developed using NodeJS, Express and MongoDB. The front-end is developed using traditional HTML, CSS and JavaScript. It automates the course allocation, Class Management, registration, generation of timetable and management. It also minimizes the clashes between courses.
1.2 Test Approach 
Testing will focus on verifying each module: authentication, registration, course allocation, timetable generation, and class management. Both functional will be tested manual test execution and web browser tool.

2. Test Plan 
2.1 Feature to be Tested
These functionalities should be tested:
Sign in 
Sign up
Register course
View course
Drop course 
Allocate course 
Deallocate course
Generate timetable 
View timetable 
Update timetable 
Delete timetable
Add class 
Remove class 
Log out
2.2 Features not to be Tested
MongoDB performance
Browser compatibility beyond Chrome and Firefox
2.3 Testing Tool and Environment
Environment: Local Host, Node.js server, MongoDB database
Tools: Postman, Visual Studio Code



3. Test Cases 
3.1 Sign in

3.2 Sign up

3.3 Register course

3.4 View course

3.5 Drop course 

3.6 Allocate course 

3.7 Deallocate course

3.8 Generate timetable 


3.9 View timetable 

3.10 Update timetable


3.11 Delete timetable

3.12 Add class 

3.13 Remove class 

3.14 Log out





































Chapter 5
Conclusion























1. Overview 
The course allocation system is web-based application that allow the student to register courses, drop courses and view timetable and the admin can maintain schedule, allocate courses and mange classroom.
2. Conclusion 
The Course Scheduling and Allocation System was designed to streamline and maximize the management of student schedules within educational institutions. Through the automation of course enrolment, teacher assignment, and timetabling, the system greatly minimizes the amount of manual work for administrative personnel. It efficiently manages recurring problems like overlapping classes, uneven teacher loads, and poor room use.

The system accommodates three primary user roles—students, instructors, and administrators—each with their own features designed to provide an effortless and tailored experience. Students can freely add or drop courses and access their schedules, while administrators can assign teachers and create conflict-free schedules through intelligent logic. The adoption of current technologies like Node.js, MongoDB, and MVC architecture provides scalability, maintainability, and performance.

3. Reference 
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/system-design/unified-modeling-language-uml-sequence-diagrams/
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/system-design/mvc-design-pattern/
https://wildart.github.io/MISG5020/standards/IEEE-1058-1998.pdf
https://chatgpt.com/
